Newsletters: add 280 (2023-12-06) (#1421)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _topics/en/cluster-mempool.md

excerpt: >
  **Cluster mempool** is a proposal to associate each unconfirmed
  transaction in a mempool with related transactions, creating a
  _cluster_.  Each cluster contains feerate-sorted _chunks_ consisting
  of one or more transactions.  If clusters are limited in size,
  we also limit how much needs to be recomputed in response to new
  transactions being added to the mempool, allowing algorithmic
  decisions affecting the entire mempool to complete fast enough to
  use them in P2P network code.

---
The overall goal of cluster mempool is being able to reason about the

> effect of transactions on the blocks a miner would create if it an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
effect of transactions on the blocks a miner would create if it has an
```

fact that eviction isn't the exact opposite of transaction selection: they're both
approximations, and the ways they are suboptimal don't cancel out, so
they don't result in the opposite order of each other.

## The obvious solution doesn't work

There is an obvious solution to the problem: instead of finding
lowest-feerate-descendant-sets, run the normal selection algorithm on the
entire mempool (don't stop after one block worth of transactions), and
see what it would include last. That's the thing you should evict!

Sadly, this is computationally infeasible. The block building algorithm
is fairly fast when running on one block worth of transactions, but
running it on the entire mempool would take a significant multiple of
the time. This is absolutely not possible to do every time any time
something needs to be evicted (which may be multiple times per second,
and ideally, with ~millisecond latency to not stall other processing).

An obvious question arises: can't we precompute things so that computing
the updated selection-order-of-full-mempool isn't too slow? And we kind of
can. What the block building algorithm ultimately does is find groups of

> transactions to include at once (e.g. child pays for parent means both

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transactions to include at once (e.g. [child pays for parent][topic cpfp] means both
```

ancestor-feerate first is just an approximation for highest-feerate
subset overall, and e.g. can't deal with
multiple-children-pay-for-the-same-parent), but more problematic is the
fact that eviction isn't the exact opposite of mining: they're both
approximations, and the ways they are suboptimal don't cancel out, so
they don't result in the opposite order of each other.

## The obvious solution doesn't work

There is an obvious solution to the problem: instead of finding
lowest-feerate-descendant-sets, run the normal mining algorithm on the
entire mempool (don't stop after one block worth of transactions), and
see what it would include last. That's the thing you should evict!

Sadly, this is computationally infeasible. The block building algorithm
is fairly fast when running on one block worth of transactions, but
running it on the entire mempool would take a significant multiple of
the time. This is absolutely not possible to do every time any time
something needs to be evicted (which may be multiple times per second,
and ideally, with ~millisecond latency to not stall other processing).

An obvious question arises: can't we precompute things so that computing

> the updated mining-order-of-full-mempool isn't too slow? And we kind of

Author: Leaving as-is.  It's true that my professional writing almost never includes hypophora, but we've used it in other contributed documentation (and the topic pages were always meant to include community contributions).  If someone dislikes it enough, they can edit the document themselves.  :-)

transactions to include at once (e.g. child pays for parent means both
will be included at once), at the feerate that included set overall has
(sum of fees divided by sum of sizes). If we could somehow precompute
those groupings (which we'll call chunks) ahead of time, then the actual
block building algorithm (ignoring binpacking issues once we get close
to the block being full) is just including chunks in decreasing feerate
order.

## Precomputing works if the only thing we chunk are clusters

So can we precompute the chunks, and update just the ones that get
affected when a new transaction or block comes in? Sadly, there is in
theory no bound on how many transactions' chunkings can get affected by
even a single new transaction---it could be the entire mempool in which
case we'd be back to recomputing everything. See [this example][wuille
slide11] where a single new added transaction completely reverses the
chunking of all transactions.

However, it is hopefully apparent that the limit of how much can be
affected by a transaction is just whatever transactions it is directly
or indirectly connected to, i.e. its cluster.<!--FIXME:harding confirm edit--> Optimal chunks never cross

> cluster boundaries---any chunk that did could be split into independent

Reviewer 2: I feel this may be a bit unclear at this stage of the explanation, but just as an overall "encyclopedic definition". A chunk is a subset of cluster, therefore must always consist of transactions that are related in some sense that makes them part of the same cluster, but within an optimal linearization, each chunk ends up necessarily consisting of transactions connected within the chunk.

> chunks, and doing so would never worsen the result.

Author: Updated the intro paragraph to the text below:

>   **Cluster mempool** is a proposal to associate each unconfirmed
  transaction in a mempool with related transactions, creating a
  _cluster_.  Each cluster contains feerate-sorted _chunks_ consisting
  of one or more transactions.  Thus, if clusters are limited in size,
  we also limit how much needs to be recomputed in response to new
  transactions being added to the mempool, allowing algorithmic
  decisions affecting the entire mempool to to complete fast enough to
  use them in P2P network code.

(The other revisions were required because we limit the first-paragraph to 500 characters in order to be able to use them in the future in something like a glossary.)

excerpt: >
  **Cluster mempool** is a proposal to associate each unconfirmed
  transaction in a mempool with related transactions, creating a
  _cluster_.  Each cluster contains feerate-sorted _chunks_ consisting

>   of one or more transactions.  If clusters are limited in size,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  of one or more transactions.  If we limit a cluster's size,
```
(otherwise the size sounds exgengous, which I don't think is the intention?)

  we also limit how much needs to be recomputed in response to new
  transactions being added to the mempool, allowing algorithmic
  decisions affecting the entire mempool to complete fast enough to
  use them in P2P network code.

---

> The overall goal of cluster mempool is being able to reason about the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The overall goal of cluster mempool is to be able to reason about the
```

effect of transactions on the blocks a miner would create if it has an
identical mempool to the local node's mempool.

> The most apparent example for why we have a need for that kind of

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The most apparent example of why we need that kind of
```

reasoning is the fact that today, the eviction mechanism (when the
mempool exceeds the node's size limit) can choose to evict the very best
transaction in the mempool overall ([example][wuille slide7]).

> To describe the current limitation in short: miners prefer to select the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To describe the current limitation in short: miners prefer to select for inclusion the
```
(otherwise, at first I read this as selecting for eviction, since that was just being mentioned.)

transactions in order of highest ancestor-feerate first (feerate of a
set formed by a single transaction and all its unconfirmed ancestors).
Eviction removes transactions in order of lowest-descendant feerate
first (feerate of a set formed by a single unconfirmed transaction and
its descendants). This mechanism is certainly suboptimal (highest
ancestor-feerate first is just an approximation for highest-feerate
subset overall, and e.g. can't deal with
multiple-children-pay-for-the-same-parent), but more problematic is the
fact that eviction isn't the exact opposite of transaction selection: they're both
approximations, and the ways they are suboptimal don't cancel out, so
they don't result in the opposite order of each other.

## The obvious solution doesn't work

There is an obvious solution to the problem: instead of finding
lowest-feerate-descendant-sets, run the normal selection algorithm on the

> entire mempool (don't stop after one block worth of transactions), and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
entire mempool (don't stop after one block's worth of transactions), and
```

see what it would include last. That's the thing you should evict!

> Sadly, this is computationally infeasible. The block building algorithm

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Sadly, this is computationally infeasible. The block-building algorithm
```
(and 4 more the same below)

> is fairly fast when running on one block worth of transactions, but

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is fairly fast when running on one block's worth of transactions, but
```

running it on the entire mempool would take a significant multiple of

> the time. This is absolutely not possible to do every time

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the time. This is not possible to do every time
```

something needs to be evicted (which may be multiple times per second,
and ideally, with ~millisecond latency to not stall other processing).

An obvious question arises: can't we precompute things so that computing
the updated selection-order-of-full-mempool isn't too slow? And we kind of
can. What the block building algorithm ultimately does is find groups of
transactions to include at once (e.g. [child pays for parent][topic cpfp] means both

> will be included at once), at the feerate that included set overall has

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
will be included at once), at the feerate that the included set overall has
```

(sum of fees divided by sum of sizes). If we could somehow precompute
those groupings (which we'll call chunks) ahead of time, then the actual

> block building algorithm (ignoring binpacking issues once we get close

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
block building algorithm (ignoring bin-packing issues once we get close
```

to the block being full) is just including chunks in decreasing feerate
order.

## Precomputing is feasible---but only if clusters are limited in size

So can we precompute the chunks, and update just the ones that get
affected when a new transaction or block comes in? Sadly, there is in

> theory no bound on how many transactions' chunkings can get affected by

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
theory no bound on how many transactions' chunkings can be affected by
```
